[CUBRIDMAN-309] Add partition pruning information to SQL Trace (#730)
CUBRID/cubrid-manual: en/sql/partition.rst

  :header-rows: 1
  :widths: 20 20 60

  * - Partitioning Method
    - Equality Predicate
    - Range Predicate
  * - Range Partitioning
    - ``=``, ``IN``
    - ``<``, ``<=``, ``>``, ``>=``, ``BETWEEN``
  * - List Partitioning
    - ``=``, ``IN``
    - Not supported
  * - Hash Partitioning
    - ``=``, ``IN``
    - Not supported

.. rubric:: Cases Where Partition Pruning Is Not Performed

- If the partition key predicate included in the **WHERE** clause differs from the expression defined as the partitioning key,
  or if the order of arguments does not match even when the expression is identical.
- If comparison operators not supported for partition pruning by the partitioning method are used.
- If the value of the partition key predicate cannot be determined at the open stage of query execution.

.. rubric:: Accessing Specific Partitions Directly

.. code-block:: sql

  ... FROM [<schema_name>.]<partition_table_name>__p__<partition_name> [AS <alias_name>] ...

  ... FROM [<schema_name>.]<partition_table_name> PARTITION (<partition_name>) [AS <alias_name>] ...

Individual partitions can be accessed by using the **PARTITION** clause or by specifying partition names directly.

> This method is available even if a partition key predicate is not included in the the **WHERE** clause or partition pruning is not performed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method is available even if a partition key predicate is not included in the **WHERE** clause, or if partition pruning is not performed.
```

Author: [e758f6d](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-manual/pull/730/commits/e758f6daf3752d21f35b856a7fc8800e6200eb91)에서 반영했습니다. 감사합니다.

Author: 시간이 많이 지나서 자체 Resolve 하겠습니다.

In such cases, the executor handles the partition as a non-partitioned table,
allowing the application of certain optimization techniques that are otherwise restricted for partitioned tables.

However, caution is required because the access scope is fixed to the designated partition.
Records satisfying the predicate are excluded from retrieval even if they exist in other partitions,
potentially resulting in incorrect results.

A target partition can also be specified in **INSERT** and **UPDATE** statements.

> Care must be taken because an error occurs if the record to be processed does not meet the mapping criteria of the specified partition,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be aware that an error occurs if the record to be processed does not meet the mapping criteria of the specified partition,
```

Author: [e758f6d](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-manual/pull/730/commits/e758f6daf3752d21f35b856a7fc8800e6200eb91)에서 반영했습니다. 감사합니다.

Author: 시간이 많이 지나서 자체 Resolve 하겠습니다.

  Query plan:

  iscan
      class: o node[0]
      index: i_olympic_range_host_nation term[0]
      sargs: term[1]
      cost:  3 card 1

  Query stmt:

  select o.host_year, o.host_nation, o.host_city, o.mascot from olympic_range o where (o.host_year> ?:0 ) and o.host_nation= ?:1

.. code-block:: text

      host_year  host_nation           host_city             mascot
  ===============================================================================
           1996  'USA'                 'Atlanta'             'Izzy'

Upon checking the profiling output after query execution,
we can observe that scans for individual partitions are displayed as **PARTITION** entries under the **SCAN** entry.
The **SCAN** entry displays scan information for the entire partitioned table,
while each **PARTITION** entry shows scan information for its respective partition.
Any partition that does not appear as a **PARTITION** entry has been excluded from the scan target.

In this example, only the ``before_2000`` and ``latest`` partitions were scanned
because they satisfy the ``s.nation_code = 'KOR'`` predicate.

> All other partitions were successfully excluded from the scan target.

Author: @greptile [0f709bf](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-manual/pull/730/commits/0f709bf3a956b22304648051ffe2b96657934faa) 커밋에서 수정했습니다.

and it is identical to the expression defined in the **CREATE TABLE** statement.
Additionally, partition pruning can be applied because range partitioning supports pruning for range predicates.

.. code-block:: sql

  drop table if exists olympic_func_range;

  create table olympic_func_range
  partition by range (YEAR (opening_date)) (
      partition before_1920 values less than (1920),
      partition before_1940 values less than (1940),
      partition before_1960 values less than (1960),
      partition before_1980 values less than (1980),
      partition before_2000 values less than (2000),
      partition latest values less than maxvalue
    )
  as (select * from olympic);

  update statistics on olympic_func_range;

.. code-block:: sql

  set trace on;

  select /*+ recompile */
      YEAR (o.opening_date) as opening_year, o.host_nation, o.host_city, o.mascot
  from
      olympic_func_range as o
  where
      YEAR (o.opening_date) between 1970 and 1990
  order by
      opening_year;

  show trace;

.. code-block:: text

      host_year  host_nation           host_city             mascot

>   ===============================================================================

Author: @greptile [0f709bf](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-manual/pull/730/commits/0f709bf3a956b22304648051ffe2b96657934faa) 커밋에서 수정했습니다.

           1972  'Germany'             'Munich'              'Waldi'
           1976  'Canada'              'Montreal'            'Amik'
           1980  'USSR'                'Moscow'              'Misha'
           1984  'USA'                 'Los Angeles'         'Sam'
           1988  'Korea'               'Seoul'               'HODORI'

Upon checking the profiling output after query execution,
we can observe that only the ``before_1980`` and ``before_2000`` partitions were scanned
because they satisfy the ``YEAR (o.opening_date) between 1970 and 1990`` predicate.
All other partitions were successfully excluded from the scan target.

.. code-block:: text

  Trace Statistics:
    SELECT (time: 0, fetch: 4, fetch_time: 0, ioread: 0)
      SCAN (table: public.olympic_func_range), (heap time: 0, fetch: 2, ioread: 0, readrows: 10, rows: 5)
             PARTITION (table: public.olympic_func_range__p__before_1980), (heap time: 0, fetch: 1, ioread: 0, readrows: 5, rows: 2)   
             PARTITION (table: public.olympic_func_range__p__before_2000), (heap time: 0, fetch: 1, ioread: 0, readrows: 5, rows: 3)   
      ORDERBY (time: 0, sort: true, page: 0, ioread: 0)

> Partition pruning can be applied even if the source column is used instead of the functional expression

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Partition pruning can be applied even if the source column is used instead of the functional expression,
```

Author: [e758f6d](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-manual/pull/730/commits/e758f6daf3752d21f35b856a7fc8800e6200eb91)에서 반영했습니다. 감사합니다.

Author: 시간이 많이 지나서 자체 Resolve 하겠습니다.

because the functional expression defined as the partition key guarantees the same sort order as the source column.

> 

Author: @greptile 일반 규칙의 예외 케이스로, 분할 키 함수 표현식(`YEAR(opening_date)`)이 원본 컬럼과 동일한 정렬 순서를 보장하면 원본 컬럼 조건만으로도 프루닝이 적용되는 동작이며, trace 출력으로 확인된 결과라 의도대로 유지합니다.

    SELECT (time: 1, fetch: 1845, fetch_time: 1, ioread: 0)
      SCAN (table: public.participant), (heap time: 1, fetch: 1838, ioread: 0, readrows: 1832, rows: 6)
        SCAN (table: public.olympic_range), (heap time: 0, fetch: 6, ioread: 0, readrows: 21, rows: 1)
               PARTITION (table: public.olympic_range__p__before_2000), (heap time: 0, fetch: 3, ioread: 0, readrows: 15, rows: 1)
               PARTITION (table: public.olympic_range__p__latest), (heap time: 0, fetch: 3, ioread: 0, readrows: 6, rows: 0)
        MEMOIZE (time: 0, hit: 0, miss: 3, size: 0KB, enabled: true)

Partition pruning is applicable even when a bind variable is used in a partitioning key predicate
because the bound value is identifiable at the open stage of query execution.

.. code-block:: sql

  set trace on;

  prepare q from '
    select /*+ ordered */
        p.host_year, p.nation_code, p.gold,
        o.host_nation, o.slogan
    from
        participant as p
        inner join olympic_range as o on p.host_year = o.host_year
    where
        o.host_year = year (to_date (?, ''YYYY-MM-DD''))
        and p.gold > 40
    order by
        p.host_year, p.gold, p.nation_code;
  ';

>   execute q using 1988;

Author: @greptile [0f709bf](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-manual/pull/730/commits/0f709bf3a956b22304648051ffe2b96657934faa) 커밋에서 수정했습니다.

      host_year  nation_code                  gold  host_nation           slogan
  ============================================================================================
           1988  'URS'                          55  'Korea'               'Harmony and progress'

Upon checking the profiling output after query execution,
we can observe that only the ``before_2000`` partition was scanned
because it satisfies the ``o.host_year = year (to_date ('1988-01-01', 'YYYY-MM-DD'))`` predicate.
All other partitions were successfully excluded from the scan target.

.. code-block:: text

  Trace Statistics:
    SELECT (time: 1, fetch: 165, fetch_time: 0, ioread: 0)
      SCAN (index: public.participant.pk_participant_host_year_nation_code), (btree time: 1, fetch: 158, ioread: 0, readkeys: 157, filteredkeys: 156, rows: 156) (lookup time: 1, rows: 1)
        SCAN (table: public.olympic_range), (heap time: 0, fetch: 6, ioread: 0, readrows: 5, rows: 1)
               PARTITION (table: public.olympic_range__p__before_2000), (heap time: 0, fetch: 6, ioread: 0, readrows: 5, rows: 1)

.. _example_partition-pruning_direct-access:

.. rubric:: Example 7. Accessing Specific Partitions Directly

> In this example, we explore how to directly query a specific partition using the **PARTITION** clause, apart from partition pruning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we explore how to directly query a specific partition using the **PARTITION** clause, separate from partition pruning.
```

Author: [e758f6d](https://github.com/CUBRID/cubrid-manual/pull/730/commits/e758f6daf3752d21f35b856a7fc8800e6200eb91)에서 반영했습니다. 감사합니다.

Author: 시간이 많이 지나서 자체 Resolve 하겠습니다.
